
Medical History, 1985, 29: 1-32.

THE NATURE OF PROVINCIAL MEDICAL

PRACTICE IN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY ENGLAND

by

IRVINE LOUDON*

I

When one looks at the history of the medical profession in eighteenth-century
England, the striking feature is the extent to which historians have concentrated on
the minority of famous and distinguished medical men, mostly in London, and how
little is known of the much more numerous rank-and-file practitioners of provincial
England. This paper is part of a study that attempts to redress the balance by an
examination of the clinical practice, the social status, and the economic rewards of
ordinary provincial medical men.

The reason for their neglect is partly the obvious one that the famous tend to leave
copious records, the obscure very few and those few that survive are usually scattered
and incomplete. It is, nevertheless, possible, on the basis of such records as exist, to
offer and test certain hypotheses; for example, that the surgeon-apothecary of the
eighteenth century was first and foremost a businessman, and often a very successful
one, motivated by a hard sense of commercialism; and that the divisions of medical
men suggested by the variety of titles and designations found in the eighteenth
century meant very little because the type of practice adopted by an individual was
dictated most of all by the competition and opportunities for business in his chosen
area of practice. It will also be suggested that eighteenth-century medical
practitioners were employed on a large scale not just for the treatment of serious
life-threatening illness, but for minor self-limiting conditions; and that they were
employed in this way not solely by an upper class well able to pay for medical care,
but by a wide range of social classes. Surgery, in particular, has been too often
portrayed as an agonizing business of "heroic" and desperate capital operations;
here it will be shown that such operations were rare events, and over ninety-five per
cent of country surgical practice consisted of simple, but often effective, procedures.
There also seems to be evidence that the first half of the century witnessed a
significant rise in the prosperity of ordinary practitioners and that the second half
was, in the words of Richard Smith junior, "The Golden Age of Physic".

Most accounts of provincial practice in the eighteenth century suggest that the
ordinary practitioners, the apothecaries and surgeon-apothecaries, advanced little if
at all in competence or prosperity throughout the century. Such advances in medical
knowledge as occurred in British medicine were largely confined to London and

*Irvine Loudon, DM, FRCGP, Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine, 47 Banbury Road, Oxford
OX2 6PE.

1

Irvine Loudon

Edinburgh. Here and there in the provinces a few exceptional practitioners stood
head and shoulders above the rank and file. John Huxham and William Withering in
physic, Charles White and William Hey of Leeds in surgery, and John Ferriar and
John Haygarth in hygiene and public health provide a few examples. Most of these
pioneers practised in the second half of the century, and most held appointments at
hospitals or dispensaries where, through their posts as honorary physicians and
surgeons, they were part of a new elite.

Below this level, the rank-and-file provincial practitioners ("the unpretentious
apothecaries-the quasi-irregulars")1 are often perceived as a group of ill-educated or
even near-illiterate tradesmen, who kept shops and combined the sale of medicines
with groceries and toilet articles. Their practice was based on a primitive knowledge
of physic and pharmacy, surgical operations crudely carried out, and unskilled
man-midwifery. The tendency for such men to combine the practice of medicine with
another occupation is taken as evidence of the poverty of medical practice at this
level. For those who see this as an accurate picture of eighteenth-century provincial
practice, it follows that the evolution of such practitioners into prosperous
respectable professional men did not occur until the nineteenth century, following
the introduction of the Apothecaries' Act of 1815 and the appearance of the general
practitioner.

Recently, however, Holmes has put forward a very different thesis.2 In his opinion,
the medical profession came into existence in the period between 1680 and 1730
because of the rise of the surgeon-apothecary. For the first time, "the doctor truly
arrives in English society".3 His claim is based on the breakdown of the tripartite
system-due in part to the Rose case of 1704-and the increasing scope of medical
practice signified by the emergence of the surgeon-apothecary; but most of all,
perhaps, on the improved education of medical practitioners through attendance at
the voluntary hospitals and the private medical schools.4 Moreover, Holmes claims
that public recognition and the development amongst medical men of a sense of
corporate identity played an important part in the "arrival" of the doctor for the
people in general. In other words, Holmes sees the transition of medicine from a
disparate ill-educated group of practitioners to a "medical profession" as a process
that took place in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, in stark
contrast to the more conventional view that these changes took place a century later.

Thus there are many aspects of medicine in the eighteenth century that are still
unresolved, and one of the most important is the extent of the market for medical
care and how that market was satisfied. One of the key questions here is the relative
contribution of the orthodox and the unorthodox practitioners-the regular

'R. H. Shryock, The development of modern medicine, Madison, University of Wisconsin Press, 1979,
p. 52.

2G. Holmes, Augustan England: Professions, state and society, 1680-1730, London, Allen & Unwin,
1982.

'Ibid., p. 167

4Holmes's emphasis on advances in medical training forms the weakest part of his thesis. Although there
was an increasing tendency for rank-and-file practitioners to attend courses of instruction in hospitals and
private medical schools or to go to Edinburgh, very few did so before 1730. Even by 1750, it was still a
small minority who received such training. There was no substantial improvement in the education of
medical practitioners before, at the earliest, the second half of the eighteenth century.

2

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

practitioners on the one hand and, on the other, the irregulars, empirics, or quacks. It
seems obvious at first sight that a large and thriving market for quackery would have
tended to depress the general standard of medical care as well as the prosperity of
regular practitioners; for we tend to see the situation in adversarial terms with two
clearly distinguished and opposing groups of practitioners locked in bitter competition
with each other. Any attempt to discover how many patients employed the orthodox
medical men, how many the quacks, and how this varied with time and place, raises a
number of questions which go beyond a matter of simple rivalry for a single market.

For example, was the market, in social terms, the same for both kinds of
practitioner? If so, was there one kind of quack for the rich and another for the poor,
or did the same one tailor his approach according to the customer? To what extent
were the services of the orthodox and the quack mutually exclusive? Did the public
drift from one to the other, or (hedging their bets) utilize both at the same time? In
attempting to answer such questions there is the obvious difficulty that quacks rarely
left records of their practice. Another, less obvious, but equally serious difficulty, is
the frequent impossibility of distinguishing between orthodoxy and heterodoxy in
medical practice in the eighteenth century.

Often, it is easy to identify the quacks or empirics because of their remarkable
tendency to run true to form. Usually, they were itinerant, advertising their
attendance in a certain town for a limited period, and tending to select the same
diseases as their particular specialities. With surprising consistency, they claimed to
cure some or all of a list of disorders, including eye diseases (especially blindness);
ruptures or "broken bellies" (cured by medicines or a special apparatus); cancers
(cured without operation); deafness (if the ear-drum was intact); and above all
venereal disease, usually mentioned in some coy euphemism.5 Often, they entitled
themselves "Dr" and sometimes added a medical degree, and they listed the famous
or royal patients they claimed to have cured. All this was advertised in characteristic
language.6 Our knowledge of this group, the blatant or obvious quacks, is based
largely on their advertisements; but even here there are pitfalls. "Chevalier" John
Taylor (1703-1772, MD Basle 1733, Liege and Cologne 1734), for example, trained
at St Thomas's Hospital, London, and was an expert oculist. Yet he was an itinerant
practitioner who chose in his advertisements to use in an extreme form the language
of the charlatan.

'For example, the following advertisement appeared in the Sherborne Mercury for Monday, 24
September 1784:

The afflicted who labour under any difficulty disorders or complaints, as well inward as outward,
incident to the human body, are hereby acquainted that Doctor and Oculist Goergslenner, from
his house No. 34 Queen Square Bristol, is arrived in the City of Exeter, where he intends to stay a
considerable time, and from thence shall come to Plymouth. He cures most perfectly all the
disorders in the sight and eyes, and likewise those who have lost their hearing and cures with
fidelity all the degrees and symptoms of a certain disorder, whether inveterate or recent, or ever
so bad, in a short time. Cures most sorts of ruptures (vulgarly called broken bellies) both in young
and old people, with a particular medicine, and the most perfect and commodious trusses, made
upon his new and much improved construction, without any steel or wood and, so easy to wear
that the patient may undergo any fatigue therewith....

6For an extensive account of eighteenth-century quackery, to which the author acknowledges his
indebtedness, see Roy Porter, 'The language of quackery'; in press (1985), for publication in a volume to
be edited by Roy Porter and Peter Burke.

3

Irvine Loudon

If we dismiss Taylor as a perverse exception, it still remains true that practitioners
in the eighteenth century were to some extent an amorphous group. The blatant
quack stood out at one end of the spectrum. At the other, the orthodox practitioner
could be identified by one or more of a number of criteria: by the possession of a
medical degree if he was a physician; by honorary appointments at a hospital or
dispensary; by the orthodoxy of his training, even if it was no more than a standard
apprenticeship; and most of all by his methods and style of practice. Between these
extremes, a grey area existed where differentiation into neat historical categories is
impossible. This should cause no surprise. In the absence of formal training,
examination, and licensing, the term "medically qualified" is often meaningless.

These are some of the historical problems that form the background to this paper,
which attempts to describe the clinical practice and social and economic status of the
provincial medical practitioner of eighteenth-century England.

II

The evidence presented in this paper is based largely on manuscript sources in
provincial record offices. Particular emphasis has been placed on a single ledger
which belonged to an eighteenth-century practice in Wells, Somerset.7 The
importance of this ledger lies in the exceptional quality and quantity of clinical notes
which describe the routine of daily practice. Major and minor cases were recorded in
unselected sequence. At the time this ledger was used-between 1757 and the early
1760s-two practitioners were in partnership: Benjamin Pulsford, the senior
partner, and William Pulsford, his nephew. The cases recorded in the ledger,
however, were all those of William.

In the early years of the eighteenth century, this practice was in the hands of
Christopher Lucas (c. 1676-1756).' Lucas was both the surgical colleague and friend
of Claver Morris (1659-1726), a physician at Wells known chiefly for the edited
account of his diary published in 1934.9 Christopher Lucas's nephew Benjamin
Pulsford (1716-84) was practising in Wells at least as early as 1742,10 but it is not
known whether he was in partnership with his uncle or succeeded him in the practice.
In either case, it was probably about 1756, following the death of Christopher Lucas,
that Benjamin Pulsford, in his turn, took into partnership his nephew William
Pulsford. The partnership is assumed from the evidence of the ledger. No partnership
agreement survives nor evidence of William's apprenticeship or training. William
died at the age of twenty-nine in July 1765.11 He was therefore in his early twenties

7Somerset County Record Office, Taunton. Catologued as the ledger of Benjamin Pulsford (Ref.
DD/FS Box 48).

8Margaret Allen, 'Medical practice in eighteenth-century Wells', Somerset Historical Studies, 1969,
25-35.

9E. Hobhouse (editor), The diary of a West Country physician, London, Simpkin Marshall, 1934.
"Based on the evidence of payment of a bill by overseers of the poor.

"1A commemorative tablet in the cloisters of Wells Cathedral appears to record the date of death as 26
July 1761. On very close inspection, it can be seen that the stone has been recut and originally the date was
recorded as 26 July 1764. Both dates are incorrect, the true date of death being 26 July 1765, recorded in
the register of births, deaths, and marriages, and preserved in the library of Wells Cathedral. The probable
reason for the mistakes was that the stone was provided long after the death of William Pulsford, by Canon
Pulsford of Wells, in the nineteenth century.

4

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

when the entries were made in the ledger, while his uncle and senior partner was in
his early forties. The later history of the Pulsfords is only marginally relevant and
many details are incomplete."2

William Pulsford died without issue; but Benjamin Pulsford had three sons, Lucas,
James, and William. Lucas and James became surgeons and Lucas joined his father,
living and practising from his father's house. Nothing is known of James except that
he died young and apparently without issue. Lucas, who died in 1819 of apoplexy
aged sixty-nine, and was described in the Gentleman's Magazine as "for many years
an eminent surgeon" in the City of Wells, prospered, and his children rose above the
level of the country surgeon: Frances (b. May 1783) married John Tudway, the
Member of Parliament for Wells, and Charles Henry Pulsford (1782-1841) became
Rector of Bumham and Canon of Wells. The non-medical son of Benjamin, the
second William Pulsford in this family, may well have been an ironmonger,'3
although described in legal documents as "Gent". One of William's five children
became an army surgeon, serving as assistant surgeon to the 8th Regiment of Foot
and full surgeon to the 1st Dragoons in the Peninsular war and at Waterloo. He died
in 1819 in Manchester (the same year as his uncle and namesake, Lucas) and, as far
as is known, was the last of this dynasty.

Only one ledger has survived from the records of this practice, but it is clear that
several were used simultaneously. In this ledger each entry began with the name of an
individual or the head of a family. When an address was added, it was always
somewhere outside the city of Wells, suggesting that the non-entry of an address
indicated a patient living in Wells. In about one-third of cases, occupation or an
indication of social status was added as well. Below these details a half or a third of a
page was left for clinical notes. If the patient was new to the practice, or had not been
seen for a long time, notes were made in the newest of the ledgers in use. If the patient
or his family had been seen recently, their notes would (if space permitted) be added
to the previous entry in an earlier ledger. This is important in so far as it makes it
impossible to determine the number of new episodes of illness or of total
consultations a year. Thus the surviving ledger was begun in February 1757 and a
new one was started some time in 1758; but records of visits were added to the earlier
entries in the surviving ledger as late as 1764.

During the eleven months, 1 February to 31 December 1757, William Pulsford

"2The main sources for constructing the details of the Pulsford family were:

The register of births, deaths, and marriages of the Cathedral Church of St Andrew's, Wells; and
sepulchralia in the Cathedral, for which the author gratefully acknowledges the help of Mr Colchester,
archivist to Wells Cathedral.

The following documents in Somerset County Record Office, Taunton:

Will of Benjamin Pulsford (Ref. DD/TD 29/43; DD/FS Box 42 c. 648); DD/SAS SE23 c. 795).
Will of William Pulsford (DD/SAS SE24 c. 795). Will of Lucas Pulsford (DD/FS Box 49 c. 648).
Abstract of title deed, William Pulsford, 1816. Obituary of Lucas Pulsford, Gentleman's
Magazine, 1819, 89(2): 92. Obituary of Benjamin Pulsford, Sherborne Mercury, 20 September
1784.

A. Peterkin and W. Johnstone, Roll of commissioned officers in the medical services of the British army
1660-1960, edited by Sir Robert Drew, 2 vols., London, Wellcome Historical Medical Library, 1968.
Bailey's British Directory, 1784. Universal British Directory, 1793-98. Samuel Foart Simmons, Medical
Register, London, 1780. W. Phelps, The history and antiquities of Somersetshire, 1839, vol. 2.

"Bailey's British Directory, 1784, includes under 'Wells, Somerset' "William Pulsford-Ironmonger".

5

Irvine Loudon

recorded in this ledger attendance on 212 individuals or families for 334 separate
episodes of illness. There were, on average, about three follow-up consultations for
every episode. Assuming that half as many consultations during 1757 were recorded
in another ledger which has not survived, it can be estimated that William Pulsford
carried out at least 1500 consultations in the eleven months of 1757. Fees charged
and payments received (not always the same) were recorded haphazardly, and
usually payment was indicated by a pen-stroke through the whole entry.

Medical men are notorious for impatient untidiness in their record-keeping. The
ledger was no exception, particularly as far as fees and payments were concerned.
Fortunately, however, William Pulsford appeared to take a delight in recording
clinical detail in a memorable, sharp, and often pungent personal style. The evidence
of William's authorship rests largely on the handwriting. There are three distinct
hands, easily distinguished. One is that of a Thomas Ogden who, following the
premature death of William, was brought in to play the part of accountant and
estimate the monies owing to William's estate and to Benjamin Pulsford, the
surviving partner, respectively. The vast majority of entries-all the case notes, as well
as most of the entries concerning fees-are in one hand. It seems clear that it was the
hand of the younger partner, William Pulsford; it was his ledger and his alone. The
third hand, that of Benjamin Pulsford, consists of brief notes, all dating from the
period after William's death and concerned solely with fees paid or unpaid. The
reason is clear. William, who had been diligent in his clinical notes, was often careless
in recording charges made or fees received. Therefore, Benjamin had the task of
going through the ledger after William's death to note what was still owing to the
practice, as it was common for bills to be paid not only several months, but often
several years, late.14 Hence the numerous entries to the effect "Bill Pulsford said he
was [or was not] paid for this". They provide the firmest evidence that William
Pulsford was the owner of the ledger.

The ledger is therefore the clinical and financial record of a young surgeon in
country practice, keen, energetic, but relatively inexperienced. Margaret Allen15 in
her account of the Pulsfords also concluded that William was the author of the ledger,
but suggested that he acted as book-keeper, entering both his own and his uncle's
cases. This is most unlikely. The nature of the entries shows clearly that the writer
was describing things he had seen for himself and decisions he alone had made.
Sometimes he and his uncle attended together (as, for example, when a major
operation was performed) but otherwise there is never a hint that he is.describing the
practice of the senior partner.

III

It is now widely recognized that the titles and designations of medical men in the
eighteenth century often bore little relationship to the nature of their practice.'6 The

"4For example, a shopkeeper and his wife and children treated for five episodes of illness in 1757, five
more in 1758, and seven in 1759, paid their bill in July 1767.

15Allen, op. cit., note 8 above.

"6See, inter al: J.F. Kett, 'Provincial medical practice in England 1730-1815', J. Hist. Med., 1964, 19:
17-29. And for an earlier period, but making this point with particular force about provincial practice:

6

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

classical model of a pre-nineteenth-century profession divided hierarchically into
three distinct groups of physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries, each adhering strictly
to their rightful spheres of practice, had little application to provincial practice. To an
increasing extent, one finds the commonly adopted designations of medical men
were such as "surgeon, apothecary, and man-midwife", or even "physician and
surgeon". There was nothing inherently illogical in such titles. Medicine was not,
from the practical point of view, regarded as so immense that no individual could
encompass the whole of it.

The kinds of factors that determined the actual manner of practice cultivated by an
individual were not only varied, but essentially opportunistic. These factors included,
for instance, temperament and personal preference, family background and
education, and apprenticeship, together with any other form of medical training. But
the most telling factor was commercial opportunity. If there was no competition at
all-if the practitioner was alone in his district-he was forced to practise all branches
of medicine whether he was entitled physician, surgeon, or apothecary. His position
was that of Robert Young, a naval surgeon in 1797, who remarked in his journal that,
whatever his rank or title, the occupation of a naval surgeon was that of physician,
surgeon, and apothecary rolled into one.'7 Most provincial practitioners practised to
some extent most branches of medicine, but individual examples demonstrate the
extent to which their choice was determined by competition.

John Barr, for example, described as "a canny Scot", came south to Birmingham
armed with both a surgical and a medical diploma from Edinburgh. Finding that
physicians were thick on the ground in Birmingham he "kept his higher diploma in
retentis", cultivated a practice amongst the Unitarians as surgeon and general
practitioner, and made a fortune."8

Richard Kay (1716-51) was an example of a practitioner who practised all
branches of medicine to the fullest extent on the basis of an apprenticeship to his
father, a pupilship to Mr Steade the apothecary to Guy's Hospital, and attendance
while in London at a course of surgical lectures and two courses of midwifery under
Smellie. For that period it was a comprehensive training, and it is interesting to find
that Kay referred to himself on one occasion as a physician and on another as surgeon
and physician.'9 Richard Smith junior (1772-1843) was a surgeon who undertook
the care of all medical cases if patients chose to employ him, and regularly dispensed
medicines from his house.20

Thomas Baynton of Bristol (1761-1820) insisted on being called surgeon, like his
father before him, but his practice embraced physic and a large amount of

R. S. Roberts, 'The personnel and practice of medicine in Tudor and Stuart England. Part 1: The
provinces', Med. Hist., 1962, 6: 363-382.

"Surgeon's Journals, at the Public Record Office, Kew (Ref. HMSArdent, 1797-98, ADM 101 85/7).

"Birmingham Record Office, Birmingham Public Library, Notes and Queries, 15, 22, and 29 June
1870.

"W. Brockbank and F. Kenworthy (editors), The diary of Richard Kay (1716-51) of Baldingstone near
Bury. A Lancashire doctor, Manchester, Chetham Society, 1968, 16; and W. Brockbank and M. L. Kay,
'Extractsfrom the diary of Richard Kay of Baldingstone, surgeon (1737-50)',Med. Hist., 1959, 13: 58-68.

'0Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, vol. 2, pp. 152-153, memoirs of Richard Smith jun. Bristol
Record Office, The Council House, Bristol.

7

Irvine Loudon

midwifery-in fact, all the business he could obtain because he was a vain, smooth-
tongued man, with an inordinate love of money, even for the eighteenth century.2'
Mr Misters of Shipston-on-Stour in Worcestershire was also described as a
"surgeon" but his records (1776-81) show that the vast majority of his cases were
medical and most of his income was derived from the dispensing of drugs.22

James Clegg of Chapel-en-le-Frith (1679-1755) was a Dissenting minister who
undertook the practice of medicine after learning the rudiments of physic from a
physician in Macclesfield. When threatened with prosecution in the spiritual courts
for obtaining access to patients through his privileges as a minister, he bought an MD
from Aberdeen in 1729 and became, by this process, a "legitimate" physician. Most
of his practice was medical but he treated surgical cases when he had to and he
practised pharmacy-that is, he dispensed medicines for his patients.23

William Broderip of Bristol, with his carriage and coachman and his grand country
house, was a prime example of a successful apothecary, although his vanity led him to
adopt the title "Dr" and pretend to be a physician in the outlying districts.' From the
manner in which they practised there was little difference between Clegg and
Broderip. Both practised physic and pharmacy, but Broderip in his best years made by
far the higher income.

The Pulsfords provide an example of a practice in which, although many medical
cases were treated, the emphasis was mainly surgical. The extent of midwifery in the
practice is uncertain. Benjamin Pulsford contracted with the overseers of the In-
parish of Wells to provide obstetric care for the poor, and also undertook some
private cases. There is no evidence that William Pulsford undertook obstetrics, but
there may have been a separate ledger for obstetrics which has not survived. The
Medical Register for 1780 lists five surgeons and apothecaries in Wells in addition to
the Pulsfords. There was also at least one physician-Dr Harington25-who is
mentioned in the ledger. Thus competition in the field of physic was strong, and
possibly in obstetrics as well, while the Pulsford practice was long-established and
probably well recognized for its preference for surgery.

Surgery in the eighteenth century was defined as the treatment of external diseases
and all which required "manual interference". It included operations, the reduction of
fractures and dislocations, the dressing of wounds and ulcers, the removal of teeth'and
the opening of abscesses, and all eye and skin diseases. Surgeons also had a virtual
monopoly in the treatment of venereal disease. Midwifery was not considered
exclusively a surgical activity and was undertaken by some physicians, surgeons, and
apothecaries as well as by the few who made it their chief activity as men-midwives or
accoucheurs.

"lIbid., vol. 2, pp. 1060-1080. See also, J. A. Nixon, 'Thomas Baynton 1761-1820', Proc. R. Soc. Med.,
1914-15, 8: 95-102.

22The account book of Thomas Misters of Shipston-on-Stour. Wellcome Institute Library, London
(Ref. MS 3584).

2'V. S. Doe, The diary of James Clegg of Chapel-en-Frith 1708-1755, 3 vols., Matlock, Derbyshire
Record Society, 1978-81.

24Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above, vol. 2, p. 157.

25Henry Harington (1727-1816) MA Oxford 1752, MD 1762, established himself as a physician in
Wells in 1753 and moved to Bath in 1771. He was a noted composer of music. On two occasions recorded
in the Pulsford ledger he arranged for William Pulsford to sound a patient for suspected bladder stone; on
neither was a stone present.

8

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

IV

The main results of an analysis of this ledger are shown in the accompanying tables.
Tables 1 and 2 are based on an analysis of the whole ledger; the remainder are based
on a sample consisting of all the cases recorded as having been seen in the year 1757.

TABLE 1. OCCUPATION OR SOCIAL STATUS OF PATIENTS AS RECORDED IN THE

WHOLE OF THE LEDGER FROM 1 FEBRUARY 1757 TO c. 1764

"The Hon: Esq."
Esq.

Attorney

Captain (army)
Clergy
Farmer

Innkeeper
Servant

Servant Boy
Gardener

"Gardener at the Pallace"
"Porter at the Pallace"
Shoemaker
Shopkeeper
Apprentice

Stocking-maker
Mason

Blacksmith

1      "Serjeant" (army)
1      Clerk

3      Silversmith
1      Carpenter
1      Millwright
12      Tanner

7      Peruke-maker
6      Glover

3      Hatmaker

1      Organ-builder
1      Glazier
1      Brazier

5      Thatcher

4      Wheelwright
3      Stay-maker
2      Pipe-maker
2      Chandler
2

Total    73

Source: The ledger of William Pulsford, Somerset County Record Office, Taunton, Somerset, accession

no: DD/FS Box 48.

TABLE 2. COUNTRY PATIENTS, LIVING ONE OR MORE MILES OUTSIDE WELLS.
THE DISTANCE FROM THE CENTRE OF WELLS TO THEIR HOMES WHEN THEIR

ADDRESS WAS RECORDED

Distance

1 to 2 miles
2 to 3 miles
3 to 4 miles
4 to 5 miles
5 to 6 miles
6 to 7 miles
7 to 8 miles
8 to 9 miles

9 to 10 miles

Number of

Patients

16
11
13

7
4
7
6
2
1

Total     67

Source: as for Table 1.

9

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Irvine Loudon

Table 1 shows the patients' occupations, which were recorded in about one-quarter
of the cases. It shows a predominance of tradespeople rather than the gentry or the
professions. It is probable that the upper levels of society in Wells would either have
employed the physician, or, if a surgeon was required, would have employed the
senior partner, Benjamin Pulsford, for his greater experience. In addition, the
Pulsfords were appointed as parish surgeons to the In- and Out-parishes of Wells, the
parishes of Wookey and Holcombe, and possibly other parishes as well. These
appointments contributed a considerable amount to their income and suggest that in
this area the old poor law system provided a reasonable standard of medical care for
the poor.

Table 2 demonstrates the distance some of the patients lived from the centre of
Wells; but not all of them were necessarily visited at home. There is clear evidence
that some attended at William Pulsford's house,26 and others stayed in Wells during a
course of surgical treatment. On several occasions, there is a record of the overseers
of the poor paying for a patient from an outlying area to be boarded in Wells for the
purpose of receiving treatment. For example, at the request of the overseers of the
poor for the parish of Holcombe: "We went to Holcombe to take off a leg for Mary
Pearl on Acct. of the bones of the Foot having been for a long time Carious, but
finding the woman able to be brought to Wells, defer'd the operation till the 21st
when it was performed at Thos: Maynard's in Prison Row." Likewise, in November
1759, an operation for fistula-in-ano was performed on the orders of the overseers in
Wells: ". . . the man was an alien, but maintained during an illness soon after by the
parish".

Table 3 shows the 334 episodes of illness recorded in the ledger during 1757, but
once again it must be emphasized that this was not the complete list for that year,
since a number of cases were almost certainly recorded in a previous ledger. It
provides, however, a representative sample. The diagnostic terms used in the table
are, with few exceptions, those recorded by William Pulsford in the ledger. The
exceptions are "skin eruptions" for some ill-defined skin conditions, and "dental
disorders" for extractions and dental abscesses, etc. "Oedema" is an interpretation
of a clinical description.

There are two main features of this table. The first is the predominance of surgical
cases; the second, the minor nature of many of the cases. Surgery in the pre-
anaesthetic era is usually pictured as a series of grim and dreadful operations of
unimaginable pain. As Porter recently described it: ". . . in the age of agony before
antiseptics and anaesthetics, surgery was limited to simple, quick or desperate
operations such as amputations, removing bladder stones and setting fractures".27
Indeed, this view has sometimes been combined with the belief that our predecessors
in this period were either less sensitive to pain or much more stoical than ourselves,
accepting or ignoring minor complaints and only consulting surgeons as a last resort.
The evidence of the Pulsford ledger provides no support for such a view; instead it
provides a more prosaic picture. Most of William Pulsford's income was derived from

"'Benjamin Pulsford in his will dated 1784 refers to the room in his house where he saw patients as his
"surgery". This is, in the author's experience, the earliest such use of the word.

"Roy Porter, English society in the eighteenth century, Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 1982, p. 303.

10

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

TABLE 3. THE DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS OF ALL CASES RECORDED IN HIS LEDGER
BETWEEN 1 FEBRUARY 1757 AND 31 DECEMBER 1757, BY WILLIAM PULSFORD

Accidents and injuries (see Tables 4 & 5)

Sore throats, ulcerated throats, and ulcerated tonsils and quinsies
Erysipelas
Smallpox
Fever

Venereal Disease
Skin eruptions
The itch

Herpes of the lip

Sore legs (mostly ulcers of the legs)
Boils and abscesses
Abscess of the ear

Soreness, induration, or abscess of the breast
Whitlow

Inflamed arm following venesection
Fistula-in-ano

Perianal abscess

Inflammatory swellings

Swellings of the neck including scrofula
Dental disorders

Ulcers of the mouth
Hernia

Phymosis and paraphymosis
Hydrocoele
Piles

Corns on the feet
Warts

Ganglion

Haematoma

Suppression of the urine
Sore eyes
Albugo

Pain in the limbs
Caries of bone

Incisted [sic] tumor of lip
Cancer of breast
Cancer of tongue
Nose bleed

Oedema, cause obscure

Inoculation against smallpox

Diagnosis obscure or uncertain

91
35

5
3
2
6
7
4
3
31
25

2
7
3
3
1
2
11

9
4
12
4
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
14
4
9
3
1
2
1
2
1
9
7

Total    334

Glossary

The itch-scabies.

Phymosis and paraphymosis-inflammatory swelling of the foreskin.
Hydrocoele-accumulation of fluid surrounding the testicle.

Ganglion-cystic swelling arising from the tendon, usually on the back of the hand or wrist.
Haematoma-a tumour consisting of an extravasation of blood.

Albugo-a scar on the cornea following a corneal ulcer; smallpox was here a common cause.

Source: as for Table 1.

11

Irvine Loudon

the treatment of minor injuries, boils and abscesses, skin rashes, warts, whitlows,
piles, and sore eyes. External sepsis of pyogenic tuberculous or syphilitic origin
affecting the skin, lymph glands, or bones and joints, was common; and surgical care
for minor complaints was sought not just by an effete gentry to whom a surgical fee
would be immaterial, but by all social classes. Chronic infections and ulcers,
especially the ubiquitous leg ulcers,28 required repeated attendances over weeks or
months, with the compensation of providing a steady source of income. For example,
Mr Salmon (status or occupation not recorded) was treated from February 1757 until
October 1758 for a chronic suppuration with ulceration of the leg; and a Mr Bethy's
daughter in 1757 "was near five months underhand [with] a sore on her inner
ancle". Pulsford carried out a few amputations, but such major surgery alone would
never have provided a living. Pulsford, and indeed most surgeons of the period,
depended for their living on routine procedures that would, in most instances, now be
carried out by the nurse of a general practice or a casualty department.29

The common picture of the eighteenth-century surgeon frequently engaged in
major operations should be modified. Instead, a picture should be substituted of a
surgeon such as William Pulsford making his rounds on horseback with two large
saddlebags containing ointments, lotions, bandages, and plasters, as well as
instruments.30 In the periods between urgent calls, his time would be spent on the
tedious and often smelly business of draining pus from infected wounds and abscesses
and dressing chronically infected and suppurating lesions. William Chamberlaine was
explicit on the realities of the surgical life when he warned the apprentice surgeon:

Are you too fine a gentleman to think of contaminating your fingers by administering a clyster
to a poor man, or a rich man, or a child dangerously ill when no nurse can be found that knows
anything of the matter? This is a part of your profession that it is as necessary for you to know
how to perform as it is to bleed or to dress a wound. Or are your olfactory nerves so delicate that
you cannot avoid turning sick when dressing an old neglected ulcer; or when, in removing
dressings, your nose is assailed with the effluvia from a carious bone? If you cannot bear these
things, put Surgery out of your head and go and be apprentice to a Man Milliner or Perfumer.3"

This is a memorable account of the true nature of surgery, and it has an important
bearing on the social status of the surgeon. The physician, unless as a country doctor
he had to treat all conditions, scarcely came into physical contact with his patient
except to feel the pulse. He could, and usually did, stand aloof; his dignity depended
on it. Surgery, on the other hand, was emphatically a manual craft, unsuitable for
refined and delicate sensibilities. Although surgery contained a large element of

28I. S. L. Loudon, 'Leg ulcers in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century', J. R. Coll. Gen. Practnrs,
Part 1, 1981, 31: 263-273; Part 2, 1982, 32: 301-309.

29A nurse was occasionally employed by William Pulsford, but usually only in the final period of healing.
It is not known whether she was paid directly by the patient or by Pulsford.

"0This was also true of hospital surgery in the eighteenth century. For example, out of 152 surgical
in-patients admitted to the Nottingham General Hospital in 1795-97 under the care of Mr John Wright,
honorary surgeon to the hospital, only four underwent major or "capital" operations. A large majority
were admitted with ulcers and inflammations treated by local applications, dressings, diet, and bed-rest.
University of Nottingham Library: manuscripts department. 'Patients' treatment book 1781-1801' (Ref.
Uhg 0 1).

"1William Chamberlaine, Tirocinium medicum: a dissertation on the duties of youth apprenticed to the
medical profession, London, 1813.

12

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

coarseness, its effectiveness lay not so much in the dramatic realm of so-called heroic
surgery as in the simple non-operative measures. At this prosaic level the eighteenth-
century surgeon could relieve and cure many common complaints. It is probably true
to say that the intervention of the plain country surgeon like William Pulsford,
exercising his skill with fractures, dislocations, abscesses, and toothache, achieved far
more than the most wise and skilful physician. Campbell, the author of The London
tradesman (1747), would have shared this view. He was frankly scornful of the
effectiveness of physicians, but regarded the surgeons much more favourably. His
description of the nature of surgical practice corresponds closely to the practice of
William Pulsford, and he believed that "a properly qualified" surgeon could not only
obtain a "lucrative employment", but, unlike the physician, deserved it. "An
ingenious Surgeon, let him be cast on any Corner of the Earth, with but his case of
Instruments in his Pocket, he may live where most other Professions would starve."32

Probably the greatest part of William Pulsford's time was spent in the tedious
treatment of chronic infective conditions, but the most common category-and the
one in which the surgeon was able to offer most effective treatment-was accidents
and injuries. These ranged from minor sprains to severe injuries, and the nature and
cause of these is shown in Tables 4 and 5. Injuries associated with horses were
common and often severe, emphasizing, like the evidence from the diaries of James
Clegg and Richard Kay, that horse transport in the eighteenth century was far from
safe. Accidents with farm implements were also common and one was fatal:

October 12th 1757. Mr Giblet of Westhay

Mr Giblet had the misfortune to receive a wound by a Scyth thro. the Caps.r Lig.t of the Knee:

d   td e                       t

Mr Rock of Glaston[bury] was empl. abt. three weeks after he recd. y Accidt. We saw him, laid

open on a Sinus on the Side on the Thigh and made a counter opening on the side of the
Pat.[ella]. He was in a bad low State and died a few days after.

d

vid. itin. Recd. in full 5. 0.0.

[vid. itin. = seen on a "journey", i.e., on the round of visits.]

The treatment of wounds and lacerations, a frequent occurrence in the practice of all
surgeons, was a much-debated subject in the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries. At the centre of the debate was the question whether it was safe to bring
the edges of a wound together and encourage healing by primary intention, or
whether the wound should be kept open and suppurating by the insertion of "tents"
to allow slow painful healing from below by secondary intention, leaving an ugly scar.
Broadly speaking, the end of the century saw the abandonment of the secondary
method, leaving the question of how primary healing was to be encouraged. The
alternatives were by stitching or by strips of plaster-the latter being known as the
"dry suture". Stitching carried the extra risk of sepsis from the suture material,
although it produced a neater result.33 It is interesting to find that William Pulsford in
1757 not only favoured primary wound closure but used stitches with apparent

32R. Campbell, The London tradesman, London, 1797.

33L. Heister, A general system of surgery. trans. from the German, 7th Ed., London, 1760. John Bell,
Discourses on the nature and cure of wounds, Edinburgh, 1795, and The principles of surgery, vol. 1,
Edinburgh, 1801. John Hunter, A treatise on the blood, inflammation and gun-shot wounds, 2 vols.,
London, 1812. (The work was completed in 1792.) Samuel Cooper,A dictionary of practical surgery, 7th
Ed., London, 1838, has an excellent account of the varying views on the treatment of wounds.

13

Irvine Loudon

success even in cases of inherent difficulty:

July 7 1759 Robt Reed by St John's Bridge

Cut his throat (being lunatick) but missed ye Large Vessels-I sewd it up & cured him soon.
Charged a guinea only.

Aug 7 1758 White, Shoemaker

His son fell from a Nut-Tree and rip open ye Scrotum, so that one Testicle hung out, which I
returned, stitchd up ye Scrotum and soon cured him.
Sept 2 1758, Magor of Dinder

Cut ye 1st phalanx of his Forefinger almost off wth an Hatchet, but using a suture we saved the
Finger and he has ye use of it.

TABLE 4. ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES

Bruises and sprains

slight                                     28
severe                                     12
Wounds and lacerations

slight                                      8
severe                                     10
Head injuries                                 8

(definite fractured skull)                (1)
Fractures and dislocations                   18
Burns                                         4
Eye injuries                                  2
Wasp sting                                    1

Total      91
Source: as for Table 1.

TABLE 5. THE CAUSES OF ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES

Not recorded                                 42
Horses-falls while riding, or being kicked

by horses                                  16
Falls (from ladders, trees, etc.)            10
Fighting                                      6
Accidents with guns or gunpowder              5
Dog-bite                                      2
Accidents with:

Hatchet                                     2
Hay knife; scythe; tenterhook; millstone;

fall of timber; glass; wasp sting; catgut flying into

eye while mending musical instrument    1 each

Total      91
Source: as for Table 1.

14

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

The treatment of accidents was the field in which William Pulsford appears to have
worked- with most skill and confidence, the clinical notes showing a considerable
knowledge of the pathology and treatment of the common fractures and dislocations;
on this alone, were it necessary to do so, he could have justified his occupation to
posterity.

Major operations were rare; in fact there are only five recorded in the ledger; two
amputations, two removals of a breast tumour, and one trephining in the case of a
fractured skull. These amounted to about one per cent of the total number of cases
recorded between 1757 and 1764. Once, he advised an operation for a hernia he
believed to be strangulated, but the patient-wisely-refused, and recovered. On
another occasion, he also met refusal:

Mr Moon at Callow Hill

He was brt here by Mr Gale having been thrown down by a Bull. There was a Small Wound on

d     d                                d

his head which I dress , but, c not prevail on him to be bled, as he seem greatly disordered in

his senses by the Shock; the next day my Uncle being sent for down [sic] thought he felt a
Fracture, but they wd not consent to have proper Care taken. NB This man lived but did not
recover his Senses or Speech properly.

Eye conditions were common and there are several entries referring to smallpox as
a cause of loss of vision amongst children, as in the case of a daughter of an
innkeeper:

Took [her] in hand with an albugo after ye Smallpox. Mr Keate had been her surgeon for some
time. After the use of an ophthalmic powder for some time, the chId went into the Country for a
week and returned with only a depression where the Cicatrix was without any appearance of an
albugo, but the eye soon after upon their omitting ye use of the powder grew cloudy.

An albugo is a corneal scar, of which smallpox was one cause. The same child
appears, two years later, in the ledger when her father "being in liquor he threw a
board and cut [her] head in an ugly manner".

Amongst the minority of medical cases treated by William Pulsford much the most
common were sore throats, and it seems there was an epidemic of them in Wells in
1757-59, which, with good reason, caused Pulsford to feel alarmed and helpless.
These cases were described most often as sore throat or inflamed sore throat, but also
on numerous occasions as ulcerated sore throat or ulcerated tonsils. The rash of
scarlet fever was never recorded, and the clinical descriptions do not suggest
diptheria in spite of one reference to "Dr Huxham's species" of sore throat.34
Instead, the concurrence of erysipelas (once entered in the ledger as "St Anthony's
fire of the face") suggest an epidemic streptococcal infection. The descriptions
correspond to those of Fothergill, who described A sore throat attended with ulcers in
London in 1748,35 and noted its continuation as an "epidemic sore throat in both
children and adults" in 1755.36 Many of the cases were mild, but a minority provoked
more alarm than any other condition. Serious cases occurred amongst adults as well
as children. Mr Vincent, a blacksmith, was "almost suffocated by a sore throat" in

34John Huxham, A dissertation on the malignant ulcerous sore throat, London, 1757.
35John Fothergill, An account of the sore throat attended with ulcers, London, 1748.

36John Fothergill, Gendeman's Magazine, 1755, 25(2): 343. Here the concurrence of sore throat and
erysipelas was noted, similar to the outbreak in Wells in 1757-58.

15

Irvine Loudon

June 1759. In May 1758, "Mrs Giles daughter had ye worst ulcerd Throat with ye most
alarming symptoms I ever saw in any Person, who recovered." The infection spread
through the Giles family. In October 1757, he wrote of Mrs Plympton of Wester
Compton: "Took in hand her daughter wth an excessive bad ulcerd throat, Dr
Huxham's species. There seemed to be but the least chance for Life, yet we recovered
her."

William Pulsford may have been alarmed because of a death, both tragic and
unexpected, early in 1757. The patient, the wife of a stocking-maker, was named Mrs
Poynting, and the note is quoted in full to demonstrate the quality of the clinical data
in the ledger:

Mrs Poynting sent hither about three o'clock in ye afternoon; I then found her complaining of a
slight soreness of her Throat wth which she was seized wth a chill some time in the Morning. The
Uvula was somewhat relax'd but there was not the least Appearence of Danger as she had no
Fever. I sent her D. [decoction] Rubra, was called to her at One in ye Morning and found her to
Appearence in an Hysterick Fit. She was convuls'd and her Pulse from being very strong, and
uncommonly quick, ceasd at once, and she Dyed before I cd have been wth her two minutes. She
was seven months gone w  child."

And this was not the only fatality from a throat infection. In the same month,
February 1757, Mr Savage of Priddy "who had an incapacity of Swallowing which
seemed to proceed from some Disease of the Glands, as he spit up immense
quantities of viscid phlegm" was treated with blisters and plasters while he stayed at
an inn in Wells. He retumed home with "a blister for each arm and one for the throat
... where he died a Day or two afterwards".

To summarize the clinical practice of William Pulsford and emphasize the
essentially mundane nature of country surgical practice in the eighteenth century, the
following is a list of the new cases recorded in the ledger for the week commencing 6
March 1757:

A servant boy with inflamed tonsils; D.(decoction) rubra supplied.

A chandler's wife with a "bad back" for which an embrocation was given.
A child with a hernia, treated with a plaster.
A woman given ointment for her piles.

An apprentice with a "bad knee", plastered.
A woman with a dental abscess.

A silversmith with an inflamed arm, bled once and the arm dressed twice
daily: cured in a fortnight.

A millwright with an abscess of the ear treated with drops of balsam in spirit.
An innkeeper's wife with a fractured fifth metacarpal.

A visit to a sick woman at Coaxley on the order of the overseers of the poor;
no diagnosis or treatment recorded.

A man with a "slow fever" and stomach pain. "I cut him an issue and some
days after ordered a blister."

37While it is obviously impossible to be certain of the cause of death in this case there are
features of the story which would fit an acute Haemophilus influenzae infection with epiglossitis
and/or laryngeal obstruction, suggested by the short interval between onset and death, and the
"relaxed" (? oedematous) uvula.

16

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

A farmer's wife with an inflammation of the breast "dress' until it suppurated
and broke".

A girl with an inflamed throat "treated with D. Rubra and very soon recovered".
Five deaths were recorded in the ledger. Two were from throat infections, one from
(presumed) sepsis from a severe leg wound, and two others: a patient who had been
catheterized several times for "suppression of urine" and was found dead on a
routine call; and "Mrs Parsons [who] broke her thigh two thirds up at the age of 87. I
reduced it and a strong callous formed; but the old woman grew so fond of her bed
that she never got up much afterwards-mortified her back and died of old age."

V

The size of the fees charged by the Pulsfords was determined by a number of
factors. For example, fees were higher for difficult and skilled procedures; more was
charged for an amputation than for extracting a tooth. The more attendances, the
larger the fee, and this, although obvious, was important because so many cases
required frequent attendance over long periods. If the patient was visited at home,
the greater the distance the larger the fee, although there was a tendency to charge a
flat fee for most "journeys" rather than to calculate strictly according to distance.
Outcome-that is, success or failure of treatment-had little effect on the size of the
fee. Finally, the social and occupational status of the patient could influence the fee
charged, but on the whole it is interesting how little effect this had. Where
comparable cases are recorded in the ledger, there was generally little variation in the
fee over a wide range of occupations. Substantially higher fees were usually charged
only at the uppermost end of the social scale. For example, l Os. 6d. was the Pulsfords'
standard charge for inoculation against smallpox; but the wife of the Hon. George
Hamilton Esq. was charged four guineas. Conversely, fees were not lowered for
treatment paid for by the overseers of the poor, or for the lower income groups who
paid for themselves. Sarah Cole of Lytton, who was so circumstanced it was believed
she was "on the parish", was treated for an oral infection arising from "rotten teeth"
which had to be extracted. The overseers refused to pay, and William Pulsford
charged her two guineas, insisting on payment by monthly instalments of 5s until it
had all been paid.

The interpretation of individual fees is difficult for two reasons. First, bills were
often allowed to accumulate over months or years and the fees were not itemized, but
recorded as a final total. For example, Farmer Hill of Hinton paid a bill of fifteen
guineas in May 1759, which covered a whole series of visits since March 1757.
Second, there was what might be called the "hidden economy": payment in goods
rather than money. There is one clear example in the ledger where a part-payment
was made in the form of a load of hay, and when William Pulsford "settled accounts"
with Mr Vincent, his blacksmith, it seems likely they compared what they owed to
each other and settled the difference. Richard Smith in Bristol recorded how in the
1790s he was similarly paid in goods by a patient who was a woollen-draper.38 Such
transactions would only be entered in the ledger occasionally and may have been

38Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above, vol. 2, pp. 152-153.

17

Irvine Loudon

more common than the records suggest.

TABLE 6. FEES CHARGED AND RECEIVED BY WILLIAM PULSFORD FOR VARIOUS

SURGICAL AND MEDICAL TREATMENTS. SELECTED EXAMPLES.

Accidents and injuries                                                         Fee charged
Bruised arm from being kicked by a horse                                           5s. Od.
Bruised head from a fall from a horse                                             10s. 6d.
A farmer treated for a fractured fibula                                           10s. 6d.
Reduction of a dislocated shoulder                                                1 ls. 6d.
Fractured clavicle from firing a gun                                              1 is. 6d.
Farmer's wife: "cut artery, difficult to stop"                                     7s. 6d.
Fractured skull; perforator used on cranium                                       15s. 6d.

Bruised leg from a fall from a ladder                                                1 gn.
Child: dislocated wrist from a fall from a tree necessitating three journeys       14 gns.
"Ran nail into sole of foot: troublesome symptoms arose"                            2 gns.
Millworker: "Top of finger almost cut off: sewed back on"                           5 gns.
Gunshot wound to hand                                                               5 gns.
Wound of thigh from scythe: operation, patient died                                 5 gns.
A shoemaker's sons: for one, the stitching back of a ripped-open scrotum, and for the other,

a broken thigh "cured without lameness"

Charge for both                                                                  10 gns.
Operations

Child: haematoma of skull opened                                                   5s. Od.
Gardener's child; abscess of neck opened                                           7s. 6d.
Tumour in neck opened                                                             1Os. 6d.
Farmer: abscess in groin opened                                                   1Os. 6d.
Inoculation against smallpox:

generally                                                                       1Os. 6d.
occasionally                                                                1 gn to 4 gns.
Abscess of breast opened                                                             1 gn
Shoemaker's wife: removal of breast tumour                                         14 gns.
Tumour (? T.B. glands) removed from neck                                       ?1 11s. 6d.
"Took an uncommon substance" from a child's side                                    5 gns.
Removal of breast tumour                                                            5 gns.
An apprentice: fell, fractured skull, trephined and "ten pieces of bone removed"    5 gns.
Amputation of leg (paid by overseers of the poor)                                   7 gns.

Leg ulcers and sore legs

Venesection and dressings for an inflamed leg                                      7s. 6d.
Housemaid treated for leg ulcers                                                  1Os. 6d.
"Cured a sore on the foot"                                                        1Os. 6d.
Treatment of a "foul ulcer on the leg from a dog-bite"                               1 gn.
"Ulcer on ancle" treated, "cured in 6 weeks"                                        2 gns.
Farmer treated for 4 months for a "sore leg"                                        2 gns.
"Ulcer on ancle" treated for nearly 5 months                                       24 gns.
"Sinuous ulcer on leg"; operation to "cut integuments"; thirteen journeys          24 gns.
Inflamed leg with ulceration, treated intermittently over 2 years and 6 months     14 gns.
Miscellaneous conditions

Embrocation supplied to a farmer                                                   5s. Od.
"Strained shoulder" treated                                                        5s. Od.
Child treated for tonsillitis                                                      7s. 6d.
Farmer's wife, inflamed breast: 'numerous dressings"                               gs. Od.
Child treated for many small abscesses following smallpox                         1Os. 6d.
Albugo (corneal ulcer) following smallpox, treated with eye drops                 1Os. 6d.
Woman treated for pains in the neck                                               1Os. 6d.
"Phymosis and a gleet"                                                            10s. 6d.

18

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

Miscellaneous conditions (contd.)                                         Fee charged
Farmer treated (medically) for a hard tumour in the neck                       1 gn.
A woman with gross oedema of the legs and abdomen "treated by scarification"-

and two gallons discharged                                                  11 gns.
A mason: "mortification of the sacrum, dressed twice a day"                   2 gns.
An innkeeper's wife treated for "putrid mouth ulcers"                         2 gns.
A peruke-maker: 8 minor episodes of illness in the family over a period of 3 years  ?3 16s. Od.
An attorney: 12 minor episodes of illness in the family treated over a period of seven years  10 gns.
Treatment paid for by the overseers of various parishes

Sore finger                                                                   5s. Od.
Widow with "violent pains in the limbs"                                     1QO. 6d.
Quinsy opened and pus discharged                                            1QO. 6d.
Treatment of multiple abscesses                                                1 gn.
Treatment of large wound in the leg from a hatchet                           1i gns.
Treatment of a fractured humerus                                              1J gns.
Treatment of a fractured leg                                                  3 gns.
Venereal disease treated by mercury                                           5 gns.
Amputation of leg                                                             7 gns.
Source: as in Table 1.

The most common fee charged by the Pulsfords, and also with few exceptions the
lowest fee, was 5s. This was demanded for treating a hat-maker for a sore throat; a
young woman with "the itch"; a farmer's wife whose inflamed breast was treated
with a plaster; for opening an abscess, or for extracting a tooth. This minimum fee for
a minor procedure represented perhaps half if not the whole of a week's wages for a
hat-maker; medical care was not cheap. Only once did Pulsford record that he
treated someone "gratis".39 Further examples of the fees charged are shown in Table
6, but in spite of the quantity of financial data, it is impossible to be certain of William
Pulsford's income. Following his death, an entry was made in the back of the ledger
to the effect that ?453 19s.2d. was owed to William's estate and ?458 15s.0d. to
Benjamin Pulsford. The basis of these calculations is uncertain. Probably, they refer
to the total sums owing to the partnership at William's death; some had been owing
for years. A further difficulty in estimating the profits of the partnership concerns the
dispensing of medicines. Medical treatments are mentioned in passing in the clinical
notes in the ledger but there are no prescriptions, no quantities supplied, and no
charges specifically for medicines. It is certain that William Pulsford supplied
medicines such as his almost routine "D.Rubra" for sore throats, and likely that
there was a separate prescription book which included charges apart from those
entered in the ledger. These charges could have formed a substantial addition to the
practice income. Even if the probability of a separate prescription book is ignored,
together with any "hidden" income in the form of goods, it seems likely that William
Pulsford earned at least ?400 a year.

If this estimate is correct, Pulsford earned his substantial income not from a highly
specialized practice amongst the rich, scattered over a large area, but for the most
part from ordinary simple surgical procedures in a practice of farmers, shopkeepers,
and craftsmen living in, or close to, Wells. Moreover, he was in competition with at

3On another occasion it was noted that the patient was "poor" and there was no indication of a fee
charged or received. This patient may also have been treated "gratis".

19

Irvine Loudon

least one physician, and at least two (and probably more) surgeon-apothecaries in
the area. This provides the evidence of a substantial market for medical care and a
willingness to pay Pulsford's substantial fees in preference to home remedies or less
expensive unorthodox practitioners-although, no doubt, these were employed as
well.40 Moreover, the comparison, in terms of fees and income, between William
Pulsford and Claver Morris is most revealing.

Claver Morris (1659-1726) was a graduate of Oxford University (MA 1682, MB
1685, MD 1691) and an extra-licentiate (1683) of the Royal College of Physicians of
London.4" After a period in Salisbury, he moved to Wells where he remained in
practice as a physician during the first quarter of the eighteenth century. His patients
included a high proportion of the gentry and the rich, not only throughout Somerset,
but also in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Devon, and Dorset. His impeccable
qualifications and the social standing of his patients were those of a well-known and
sought-after provincial physician of high repute. His house in the Liberty in Wells
was larger and grander than Benjamin Pulsford's house at 5 New Street; but his fees
and income were considerably lower than those of the Pulsfords. Claver Morris
charged the poor 2s. 6d., the small tradespeople 5s., the substantial tradespeople 1Os.
6d., and the gentry one guinea. It is estimated that his income from his practice was
between ?100 and ?150 up to 1710 and then between ?200 and ?300 a year. Here we
have the unexpected finding that the fees and the annual income of the well-known
physician with a practice amongst the gentry and the aristocracy were substantially
lower than those of the young surgeon, although there was only a gap of thirty years
between the end of Claver Morris's practice and the beginning of the Pulsfords'.

VI

The contrast between the incomes of Claver Morris and William Pulsford may
have been due partly to the number of patients seen. William Pulsford was busy and
most of his patients were local, while Claver Morris travelled long distances.
Nevertheless, one would have expected the sought-after physician to the rich to have
charged substantially higher fees than the young local country surgeon; instead, the
fees were much the same. This suggests three possibilities. First, that the Pulsfords'
fees were due to inflation during the intervening period. This can be dismissed,
because there is no evidence of a significant rise in the cost of living between 1700
and 1760 in England in general or Somerset in particular, and certainly not to the
extent of the difference between the two incomes.42 Second, there is the possibility
that either Morris or Pulsford were atypical practitioners; there is no evidence that

'William Pulsford tended to be equally scornful of the failures of other orthodox practitioners in his
neighbourhood and the treatments he described as "old-women's remedies", used by the patients
themselves or on the advice of friends or neighbours. Otherwise, there are no references in the ledger to
unorthodox practitioners.

4"E. Hobhouse (editor), The diary of a West Country physician, London, Simpkin Marshall, 1934.

42Gladys Bradford, 'Social and economic history [of Somerset]', in Victoria County History of
Somerset, London, Constable, 1911, vol. 2, part 1, pp. 267-337. J. E. Williams, 'The British standard of
living, 1750-1850', Econ. Hist. Rev., 1966, 2nd series, 19: 581-589. B. R. Mitchell and Phyllis Deane,
Abstract of British historical statistics, Cambridge University Press, 1962. E. W. Gilboy, 'The cost of living
and real wages in eighteenth-century England', in Arthur J. Taylor (editor) The standard of living in
Britain in the Industrial Revolution, London, Methuen, 1975, ch. 1.

20

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

they were. The third possibility is a general rise in medical fees between the early
years of the eighteenth century and the time when William Pulsford started in
practice. There is some evidence for such a change but uncertainty about the time
when it occurred. But there is support for the more general proposition that the fees
charged and incomes earned by provincial medical practitioners were substantially
higher in the second half of the eighteenth century than in the first. For example,
there is a marked difference between two bills submitted by Somerset practitioners in
1737 and 1779 respectively. They were bills to two women who suffered similar
conditions, both prolonged and both requiring numerous visits, surgical dressings,
and medicines. The first, in 1737, amounted to a total of ?10 7s.4d. and visits (about
130) were charged at about Ls. each.43 The later bill amounted to ?44 3s.Od. and
included fifty-two visits at 5s. each." Of course, the differences between these two
bills may have reflected no more than differences between the patients'
circumstances or between the habits and reputations of the practitioners. But there is
other more comprehensive evidence.

An example is provided by a medical practitioner's day-book for the period
1703-10.45 The name of the practitioner is unknown, but he practised near Leeds in
Yorkshire. The day-book shows a type of practice that corresponds to the stereotype
of the country apothecary, dispensing medicines from a shop. Examples of his notes
are sl4own in Table 7. Medicines were dispensed on the basis of uroscopy and
symptoms described either by the patient or by relatives or friends. In only about two
per cent of cases was the patient visited, and when that occurred the addresses
suggest that visits were confined largely to the well-off. Throughout the day-book,
the fees, compared to those of surgeon-apothecaries in the second half of the century,
were very low. Moreover, this practitioner regularly recorded each 1 January his
income for the previous year. Between 1703 and 1710, this ranged from ?68 19s.9d.
to ?105 18s.5d. Approximately four-fifths of his income came from the sale of
medicines and one-fifth from small-scale farming, mostly the sale of cattle. Another
apothecary's notebook for 1667-1715 (provenance uncertain) shows prices similar
to the Leeds apothecary and an annual income rising gradually from ?143 p.a. in
1697 to ?266 in 1716.46

Confirmation of the increased prosperity of medical practice in the mid-eighteenth
century is provided by the anonymous author of A general description of all trades
(1747), where the trade of the apothecary is described as a "very genteel business
and has been in great vogue of late years. . .". Some apothecaries "... . practise
Surgery, Man-Midwifery and many times officiate as Physicians, especially in the

,, 47

Country, and often become Men of Large Practice and eminent in their way. . .".

To what extent is this increased prosperity confirmed by an examination of medical

43Somerset County Record Office, Taunton (Ref. DD.L.2.Misc/4 Box 154).
44Ibid. (Ref. DD/DP. 23. OB4).

45Medical practitioner's day-book, 1703-10. The library of the Royal College of General Practitioners,
London.

"Catalogued as: Personal memoranda and notes of accounts for physic and treatment of patients
1667-1715, probably compiled by John Chaplin of Wareham probably the son of Rev. Thomas Chaplin.
Dorset County Record Office, Dorchester (Ref: PH 1).

47A general description of all trades, London, 1747.

21

Irvine Loudon

TABLE 7. EXAMPLES OF ENTRIES TAKEN FROM THE DAY-BOOK OF A MEDICAL

PRACTITIONER NEAR LEEDS, YORKSHIRE, BETWEEN 1703 AND 1710.

? s. d.
"It. Mrs Hawksworth, pain back and body", ointment prescribed                 0  0   4
"It: urin: John Booth, Rawden, foul rotten water, pain in breast, cough",

medicines dispensed                                                         0   2 10
"It: urin: Jeremy Garth son Bolton, high colour, aguish fever, pain in head",

medicines dispensed                                                         0  0   6
"It: urin: James Pearson wife Denholm, lingering slow fever, pain in head",

medicines dispensed                                                         0   1 0
"It: urin: Richard Brook son Cleckheaton, age 24, pale colour, stomach clog'd, pain in

breast", medicines dispensed                                                0  0   4
"It: to John Clapham, Ottley, cough consumptive like, brest stopt", medicines dispensed  0  2  6
"It: urin: Young woman age 17 years, pale colour, epileptick fits feared",

elixir prescribed                                                           0  0   4
"It: visit to Mrs Langley Priestly Greekn, Rheumatism, pain in back and body",

medicines dispensed                                                         0 15   4
"It: visit to John Walker Ganthrop Hall, cough, consumption feared",

medicine dispensed                                                          0  7   0
"It: visit to Mr Stead son, Baylock, surfet, cough, consumptive", medicine dispensed  0  5  0
"It: to Daniel Hanniway, Sorwoodhouse, cough, stopping in brest, vomiting of bile,

water", medicine dispensed                                                  0   0  6
"It: visit to his son there age 22 years, cough, surfet, consumptive like",

medicines dispensed                                                         0   2  0
M. Received for Medicines contained in the former Note Book & in this from

January 1st 1702/3 to January 1st 1703/4, ?56.18.1 & from other goods ?13.14.8d

being in all the sum of-                                                   70 12   9

Source: Medical notebook donated to the Royal College of General Practitioners by Dr Jameson. Library

of the College.

records of this period? The most frequent records of medical practice are
practitioners' bills. Some are private bills; many are bills from parish surgeons to
overseers of the poor. A number of these were examined and certain commonly
recurring items were selected for comparison-the cost of two common types of
medicine (mixtures and draughts) and the cost of journeys or visits. These, with the
average cost of all the medicines prescribed, were abstracted from the bills and a
selection of the results of this exercise is shown in Table 8.

TABLE 8. EXAMPLES OF FEES CHARGED BY MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS IN THE

EIGHTEENTH AND EARLY NINETEENTH CENTURY IN TERMS OF AN AVERAGE FEE
FOR MEDICINES, THE FEE FOR MIXTURES, DRAUGHTS AND FOR JOURNEYS OR VISITS,
TAKEN FROM BILLS TO PRIVATE PATIENTS AND TO OVERSEERS OF THE POOR IN

VARIOUS PARTS OF ENGLAND.

Reference                                     Average   Fee       Fee       Fee
to                                           fee for    for       for       for

source    Date       Source                   medicines mixtures  draughts  journeys
Private medical bills

1.       1697       Mrs Tudway, Somersetshire ls. Od.  is. Od.   ls. 6d.
2.       1703-10    Charges of a Yorkshire

practitioner near Leeds  4s.-Js. Od.                2s. Od.
3.       1712       Mrs Tudway, Somerset    is. 2d.    is. 4d.   is. 6d.
4.       1735       Alexander Popham         8d.

5.       1737       Mrs Luttrell, Somerset   9d.                           is. Od.

22

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

Average
fee for

medicines

Source

Mr Dickinson, Somerset   is. Od.
Thomas Carew, Somerset   ls. Od.
Thomas Carew, Somerset   2s. 9d.
Mr Talbot, Bedfordshire  2s. Od.
Charges of Mr Misters,

surgeon at Shipston-on-

Stour, Warwickshire    2s. ld.
Charges of William Elmhirst

of Yorkshire           2s. Od.
Mrs Sandford, Somerset   2s. 6d.
Mrs Blackall, Somerset   2s. Od.

William Carr of Leeds    is. 6d.-2s.
Mr Gibbs, Somerset

Fees charged by Mr Tuson,

apothecary, Northants  3s. 2d.

Fee
for

mixtures

Fee
for

draughts

is. Od.        is. Od.
is. 6d.        2s. 6d.

is. Od.

is. 6d.
is. Od.
ls. Od.

is. 6d.

is. 9d.
2s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
2s. 3d.
3s. 6d.

Bill submitted by parish surgeons to overseers of the poor

Parish of Bridewater,

Somerset                9d.
Parish of Bishop's Hull,

Somerset                7d.
Parish of Broomfield,

Somerset

Parish of Hutton, Somerset 2s. Od.
Parish of Brington,

Northants               is. 9d.
Parish of Badgworth,

Somerset                 ls. 9d.
Parish of Babcary, Somerset
Parish of Charlton

Mackerell, Somerset     2s. 3d.
Parish of Caddington, Herts 2s. 3d.
Parish of Easton-in-

Gordano, Somerset       2s. 6d.

8d.
6d.

8d.

is. 6d.         is. Od.

8d.

2s. 4d.     Ss. Od.
2s. Od.     2s. 6d.

2s. Od.     2s. 6d.

2s. 6d.
is. 6d.     5s. Od.

2s. 6d.       is. Od.       2s. 6d.

SCRO = Somerset County Record Office

NCRO = Northamptonshire County Record Office
BCRO = Bedfordshire County Record Office

SCRO DD/TB Box 16

Notebook of a Leeds practitioner
SCRO DD/TD Box 16

SCRO DD/TB Box 13. 8

SCRO DDL.2 Misc/4 Bx 154
SCRO DD/DN 206

SCRO DD/TB Box 10

SCRO DD/TB Box 14. 20
BRCO CRT 110/27

Wellcome MS 3584, Wellcome Institute Library
Sheffield Public Library FH/13 63398

23

Overseers' bills

17. SCRO DB. bw. 2323

18. SCRO D/P/ b. hl. 18/2/11
19. SCRO D.P.broo. 13/2/3

20. SCRO D.P.Hut. 13/2/1-3
21. NCRO 49/P. 151

22. SCRO D/P/Badg. 13/2/4,5
23. SCRO D/P Bab. 13/2/1

24. SCRO D.P. Cha. Ma. 13/2/1,2
25. BCRO DDP 35/12/2

26. SCRO D.P. E.in.G. 13/2/2

Reference
to

source

Date

Private medical bills (cont.)

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

1745-48
1742
1754
1759

1766-71

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Fee
for

journeys

1Os. 6d.
2s. 6d.

2s.-7s.
5s. Od.

1768-73
1772-79
1782

1788-1800
1801
1818

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

1725
1746

1767-70
1768
1784

1786
1786

1792-93
1799
1819

Sources:

Abbreviations:

Private patients' bills

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Irvine Loudon

Table 8 (cont.)

Private patients' bills

12. SCRO DD/DP.23.OB.4

13. SCRO DD/TB Box 15/11,12

14. Wellcome MS (uncatalogued) Wellcome Institute Library
15. SCRO D/P/Chedz 13/10/4. s341
16. NCRO CA 242

Other examples are provided by overseers' bills for other forms of medical and
surgical care. Overseers were required to be sternly economical with parish money;
they could, and sometimes did, refuse to pay charges which seemed excessive. Yet,
with few exceptions, they did not object to fees charged by parish surgeons
equivalent to the charges made to private patients. For example, the overseers of the
parish of South Cadbury in 1775 paid the parish surgeon 15s.6d. for one journey and
"setting a lad's collar bone"-the simplest of all fractures to deal with.48 In 1771, Mr
Bryant was paid by the overseers of the parish of Broomfield, ?8 19s.0d. for "laying
open and curing an Imposthumation", and in 1770 they paid three guineas for the
reduction of a fractured thigh.49 In 1746, however, the fee paid by the overseers of
the parish of Bishop's Hull in Somerset for opening and curing a large abscess in the
head-which required a series of visits-was only lOs.6d.5? The contracts when the
surgeon was paid by salary often show a similar difference. In Bedfordshire in 1729,
John Sharpe, apothecary, contracted with the overseers of the poor at Eaton Socon
to supply all care to the poor (including medicines) for ?5 for a period of fifteen
months. In contrast, Walter Borlase, parish surgeon in 1790 to Ampthill, was paid
eleven guineas a year for a similar contract.5" The parish surgeons of Stour (Stower)
Provost in Dorset were paid a retaining salary for all treatment except midwifery,
smallpox, and broken bones. In 1786 the salary was five guineas p.a.; in 1787, ?8;
and by 1803 it was twelve guineas. As the population of the parish in 1801 was only
604, these salaries must have been easily earned.52 This evidence suggests that the
fees charged by provincial practitioners increased around 1740-50 and then, from
1750 until the early nineteenth century, remained level, with the exception of fees to
parish surgeons which often rose sharply in the early nineteenth century. The
prosperity of practitioners depended not just on the fees they could charge, but also
on the number of patients per practitioner and the amount of medicine and other
forms of care those patients could be persuaded to accept. Rough estimates of
doctor/population ratios can occasionally be made in the eighteenth century, but
accurate estimates are generally impossible before the census of 1841. As for the
quantities of medicine provided, these, in the eighteenth century, were often
astonishing. The "Golden Age of Physic" was based on the sale of vast quantities of
medicine, much of it made up in small individual bottles or packages, each charged
individually to maximize profits.

48Somerset County Record Office (Ref: D. P. Cad. S.13/2/4).
49Ibid. (Ref: D.P. Broo. 13/2/3).
"0Ibid. (Ref: b/p/b.hl. 13/2/1 1).

"Bedfordshire County Record Office (Ref: DDP 5/12/4 & P/30/8/1).
"Dorset County Record Office (Ref: P3541OV4,5).

24

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

For example, at the end of 1754, the medical attendant to the Carews of
Crowcombe Court, Somerset, presented his bill for the year.53 This one family had
been supplied in 1754 with medicine, delivered daily including Sundays except for a
few gaps here and there, totalling 687 items plus seven bleedings and two blisters.
The bill (twenty-three closely written foolscap pages) came to ?154 5s. 7id., of which
?50 was carried forward from a previous unpaid bill. By comparison, the same family
in 1737 paid ?41 6s.6d. for about 450 items of medicine.5 Other bills for medicine
supplied to private patients in Somerset confirm the large quantities provided.

Richard Smith junior in Bristol furnished vivid evidence of the profits to be made
from the dispensing of medicine until the appearance of the dispensing chemists
brought the golden age to an abrupt halt. Smith, as a young man, "had a patient
bequeathed to me by Mr Alland who frequently took day and night (for if he was
awake he took a draught) six or seven bottles-my apprentice regularly made up and
ready two or three packets",55 and his aunt took some mysterious pills on certain days
"her regular banyon or blackwood days" and paid her apothecary ?30 to ?40 every
Christmas.56 Certain medicines containing musk or oil of cinnamon were used for
"grandees", and these were charged at 10s.6d., of which at least lOs. was profit. A
family called the Greenlys at Clifton "could not move without a regular supply of
physic-they took with them to Weymouth 200 'tonic draughts' and one thousand
pills of various descriptions--as there were no pill machines in those days Lassall [the

"157

apothecary's apprentice] told Smith he was 'sick to death with the rolling of them'.

The upper and middle classes, at least, were great medicine-takers in the eighteenth
century, not only for illness, real or imagined, but for the prevention of disease or the
general belief that medicines improved their health. In addition, "there were
abundance of people who, every spring and fall, lost blood and were disciplined for a
fortnight or three weeks".58 Others required an issue to be made and kept open
(sometimes for months or even years), imagining themselves ill if it was not kept
discharging.59 The sale of medicine, however, held pride of place, outstripping the
surgeon's bleeding, blisters, and issues.

In this respect, the purchase of medicines and medical care was a part of the
commercial boom in eighteenth-century England. Recently, a number of historians
have drawn attention to the birth of the consumer society and the "consumer
revolution" of the third quarter of the eighteenth century.60 The impression of a rise
in prosperity of medical practitioners dating from 1740-50 coincides with evidence
of a rapidly expanding market economy from the mid-century. Farmers and

51Somerset County Record Office, Bill for Mr Bernard Baine to Thos. Carew Esq. 1754 (Ref. DD/TB
Box 14/20).

"Ibid. (Ref. DD/TB Box 13/8).

"5Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above, vol. 2, p. 153.
5"Ibid., p. 154.

57Ibid., pp. 155 and 156.
5"Ibid., p. 154.

5"An issue was an incision through the skin (usually on the upper arm, back, or thigh) kept open and
discharging by the insertion into the wound of a variety of small objects. It was supposed to act as an exit or
drain for acrid humours in the blood. There is a good discussion of issues in Samuel Cooper, Dictionary of
practical surgery, 7th ed., London, 1838.

60See particularly N. McKendrick, J. Brewer, and J. H. Plumb, The birth of a consumer society, London,
Europa 1982; and Porter, op. cit., note 27 above, ch. 5: 'Getting and spending'.

25

Irvine Loudon

manufacturers of the kind found in Wells thrived as never before, and medical
practitioners cashed in on this market. From the point of view of the costs of starting
in business and basic costs of materials, there were few occupations so profitable as
that of the surgeon-apothecary. As Campbell remarked in 1747 of the apothecary:
"There is no Branch of Business, in which a Man requires less Money to set him up
than this very profitable trade.... His profits are unconceivable. ..."

Adam Smith's well-known defence of the apothecary in 1776 must have
gladdened the hearts of medical practitioners at a time when they were beginning to
be criticized for their fees: "The skill of an apothecary is a much nicer and more
delicate matter than that of any artificer whatsoever. . .", and though he should sell
his drugs at a profit of a thousand per cent, ". . . this may frequently be no more than
the reasonable wages of his labour charged, in the only way he can charge them, upon
the price of his drugs. The greater part of the apparent profit is wages disguised in the
garb of profit."6" Adam Smith suggested that the apothecary in a market town could
earn an income of ?400-?500 a year, which is in line with the estimated income of the
Pulsfords in the 1750s.

Nearly all the examples in this paper have been drawn from the South of England.
Income levels may have been lower in the North. William Elmhirst in Yorkshire, for
example, is estimated to have earned about ?250 a year from medical practice;62 and
it should be mentioned in passing that the fees earned by country surgeons in
Scotland were very much lower than those in England. In fact, the poverty of country
practice in Scotland was proverbial in the nineteenth century as well as the
eighteenth.63 In England, however, the income of the country practitioner often
compared favourably with that of other trades and professions. For example, Joseph
Massie's estimates of income for 1759-60 were ?100 p.a. for the superior clergy, and
?50 p.a. for the inferior; ?100 p.a. for persons professing the law; and ?150 for the
richest farmers.64 Possibly, the estimates for law and the church are on the low side.
The legal profession became increasingly prosperous through the growth of non-
litigious business, and Holmes suggests ?1 00-?200 as the income of minor clergy and
?250 at least for the middle ranks.65

The successful medical practitioner could look for extra sources outside the fees
for private practice. In particular, medical care provided by the parish under the

"'Adam Smith, Wealth of nations, London, 1776.

6"The Elmhirst ledger, Sheffield Public Library, local collection, (accession no: FH/13 63398). See also,
E. M. Sigsworth and P. Swan, 'An eighteenth-century surgeon and apothecary: William Elmhirst (1721-
73)', Med. Hist., 1982, 26: 191-198.

63The account-book of James Steedman of Kinross dating from 1758 (the library of the Wellcome
Institute for the History of Medicine, London, MS 4702) demonstrates the low fees charged; and another
fine example can be found in the bill to a Writer in Lanark in 1759 in John Glaister, Dr Smellie and his
contemporaries, Glasgow, James Maclehose, 1894, pp. 16-17. See also, Sir Walter Scott, The surgeon's
daughter, new ed., London, George Routledge, 1831 (first published in 1827): "There is no creature in
Scotland that works harder and is more poorly requited than the country doctor, unless perhaps, it be his
horse." The hero of this novel, the surgeon Gideon Grey, was said to travel 5,000 miles a year on
horseback and earn less than ?200 p.a. Gideon Grey was based on a true Scottish practitioner, Dr
Clarkson of Selkirk, and the detail is accurate.

64Peter Mathias, 'The social structure in the eighteenth century: a calculation by Joseph Massie', Econ.
Hist. Rev., 1957-58, 2nd series, 10(1): 30-45.

6'Holmes, op. cit., note 2 above, pp. 93-96.

26

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

"old" poor law provided a reasonable standard of care for the poor and often a
substantial income to the practitioners, particularly when the records show clearly
that many practitioners held appointments at several parishes, as, indeed the
Pulsfords did.66 The poor law records of payment to practitioners in various counties
tend to support the conclusions of Lane, whose extensive work on poor law surgeons
in Warwickshire in the eighteenth century suggested that ". . . in the half century
before 1800 ... medical attention for the regular and occasional poor ... was not
appreciably worse than other villagers enjoyed".67 Indeed, it may have been better.
The lowest fee charged by William Pulsford was 5s. In the South and West of
England in 1768, Arthur Young found that the pay per week of a day labourer varied
from 4s.6d. to lOs. (briefly, in the harvest) and was, on average, 5s. a week.68 It would
have been difficult or impossible for a labourer in Wells to have employed Pulsford's
services, even for the slightest of illnesses. A correspondent wrote in 1787: "The
apothecaries in the country charge so high for their attendance and medicines that a
poor distressed hardworking man (if he is a few weeks in illness) dreads the
consequences of employing them, as if he survives the illness he knows it will be an
additional drawback in his labour (for perhaps several years) to get clear of the
apothecary."69 It is no accident therefore that the growth of the Friendly Societies in
the second half of the eighteenth century was spectacular. In Taunton, for example,
the first was established in 1751; by 1796, there were 114.70 These societies not only
helped the poor in sickness, they provided another source of income for medical
practitioners. There are a few scattered references in the Pulsford ledger to payments
by "the clubb". But later, in the 1790s, a practitioner from Towcester, a Mr Sabin,
derived a substantial income from club practice, particularly the "Bear Club".7"

So far in this paper, obstetrics has scarcely been mentioned. Although for reasons
of space, clinical practice cannot be discussed, some mention should be made of the
economic aspects of the practice of man-midwifery. Some practitioners undertook
obstetrics because there was no one else in their area to do so; others used it as a
means of becoming established, and gave it up as soon as they could; and some
persisted with it from the enjoyment of exercising an acquired skill.72 Very few did it
for profit. "I know of no surgeon", wrote Richard Smith, "who would not willingly
have given up attending midwifery cases provided he could retain the family in other

"In Bedfordshire, for example, Mr MacGrath of Biggleswade was, in 1811, the parish surgeon to seven
parishes. The smallest with a population of eighty-eight paid him ?4 4s.0d. a year; the largest (which he
shared with another surgeon) had a population of 1,895 and MacGrath's share was ?22 10s.0d. a year. For
attending the poor of all seven parishes (total population 3,429) he earned, in 1811, ?106 5s.0d.
Bedfordshire County Record Office, Bedford. The Whitbread Correspondence (Ref. W/773).

"Joan Lane, 'The provincial practitioner and his services to the poor, 1750-1800', Bull. Soc. soc. Hist.
Med., 1981, 28: 10-14.

"Arthur Young, A six weeks tour through the southern counties of England and Wales, London, 1768.

"Correspondence of the 2nd Earl of Hardwicke. Letter from Joseph Pawsey (1787). British Library,
Add. MS 35,694. (Transcript in Bedford County Record Office, ref: CRT 100/27/3 (II), p. 132.)

70Margaret Fuller, West country friendly societies, University of Reading, Museum of English Rural
Life, 1964.

"Northampton County Record Office, Mr Sabin, prescription book 1797-98 (Ref. YZ 1770).

"'For example, John Padmore Noble, surgeon to Bristol Infirmary from 1777-1812: "Undoubtedly his
forte was man-midwifery and, feeling himself so completely at home in this branch might give him a
pleasure which balanced in his mind its privations and inconveniences." Bristol Infirmary biographical
memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above, vol. 2, p. 840.

27

Irvine Loudon

respects.... I do not speak of the Metropolis...."      Smith was right; outside
London (an important exception) obstetrics was poorly paid in terms of the time
involved and the enormous mental and physical strain of prolonged and anxious
attendance where the outcome was so uncertain.74 The unprofitable nature of
man-midwifery is shown by the records of Danvers Ward, a Bristol surgeon who,
failing in several attempts to become elected to the Infirmary, cultivated faute de
mieux a large obstetric practice. He made the memorable claim of having in one year
".... put to bed two hundred and forty six women, of which number twenty were
confined in the space of one week".75 He may have boasted, for recently I found his
accounts for 1787.76 In that year, he delivered 121 women. No payment was
recorded for fifteen, half a guinea for seventy-seven, one guinea for fifteen, two
guineas for twelve, and three guineas for two. In the same year, he recorded 161
consultations for other conditions. These were not usually defined, but they included
fractures, dislocations, bleedings, and tooth extractions. As a whole, the other
consultations would have been much less arduous than obstetrics; yet the average fee
for midwifery cases was 14.4 shillings, and for the non-obstetric, 14.3 shillings,77
although as a well-known man-midwife in Bristol, Ward probably commanded high
fees for his services. At all events, for the time and effort involved, medicine and
surgery were much more profitable than midwifery, provided the practitioner could
be fully employed in them.

Sometimes, medicine in the eighteenth century is described as an occupation in
which the elite of physicians and surgeons could make a fortune, while the rank and
file struggled desperately against a distrustful public and an army of successful
quacks. The evidence here suggests, on the contrary, that there was an
extraordinarily favourable market to be exploited by surgeon-apothecaries imbued
with a lively spirit of hard commercialism during the second half of the eighteenth
century. Subsequent changes are beyond the period of this paper, but evidence
presented previously suggests that there was a sharp decline in the income of the
successors to the apothecaries and surgeon-apothecaries-the general
practitioners-during the first half of the nineteenth century; and that this decline
was due mainly to three factors, the increased cost of medical education, competition
from dispensing druggists, and the over-production of medical practitioners
following the Apothecaries' Act of 1815.78

Thus, there is no support for the common view that the prosperity of the rank-and-
file practitioners of medicine steadily increased from the eighteenth into the

"Ibid., vol. 2, p. 157.

74The memoirs of Richard Paxton who practised in Maldon, Essex, c.1750-90, provide vivid examples
of the grim reality of man-midwifery as practised in the country in the eighteenth century. Library of the
Wellcome Institute, London, MS 3820.

"Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above, vol. 4, pp. 48-50.

7The cash-book of Danvers Ward of Bristol, 1786-7. Gloucester County Record Office (Ref: D 1928,
A3).

"Dr John McCulloch of Liverpool, who delivered, between 1797 and 1810, 2900 women, charged
closely similar fees to those of Danvers Ward. The average fee recorded was 15.3 shillings. I am grateful to
Mr Paul Laxton of the Department of Geography, Liverpool University, for providing this information
and allowing me to publish these results of his research.

78Irvine Loudon, 'A doctor's cash-book: the economy of general practice in the 1830s', Med. Hist.,
1983, 27: 249-268.

28

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

nineteenth century together with the improved status and education of the general
practitioner. The opposite seems to be the case. If the practitioners of the second half
of the eighteenth century were better off than their nineteenth-century successors,
what was their standing in society? What, in particular, was the position of the
Pulsford family in Wells?

VII

Benjamin Pulsford was a man of considerable property. He inherited a landed
estate from his uncle, Christopher Lucas (see Part I), bought property in both the In-
and the Out-parish of Wells and the parish of Croscombe, and purchased from Lord
Waldegrave land in Woodford. He also owned a fourth share of a lead mine. The
property in hi$ house, which he divided amongst his sons in his will, included
furniture, pictures, "useful" and "omamental" china, books on "physick and
surgery", "the skeleton in my surgery", pistols and at least three sporting guns, one
of them silver-mounted. He also bequeathed his horses to his sons. Three close
friends are remembered in his will, one being a partner in the lead mine. Two are
simply described as "Gentlemen" and the third was the Reverend John Prowse of
Camerton.79

Although little is known of the social standing of the Pulsfords, one is left with the
impression that they were literate but not learned men, more interested in field
sports and farming than religion, philosophy, or the arts. They were businessmen,
able and willing to command high fees for their skills, and as a consequence they were
prosperous.

Wells in the eighteenth century was predominantly a market town, dependent on
agriculture and the clothing industry, particularly stocking-making. The uplands of
the Mendips were unenclosed until the 1770s, but the lowlands were richly
cultivated. In 1801, the population of Wells was 4,505. It is generally supposed that
the population had altered little and had been in the region of 4,000 to 5,000 at least
for a hundred years previously.80 The surrounding villages visited by the Pulsfords
cannot have contributed an extra population of more than, at most, another 5,000-
7,500. Yet, in 1780, this population supported seven surgeon-apothecaries
(including two Pulsfords-Benjamin and Lucas) and at least one physician.81 Even if
some of these practitioners spent much of their time in additional occupations such as
farming there must have been a thriving market for orthodox medical care. And
there is no reason to believe that in this respect Wells was exceptional. Taking into
account all the social and economic data discussed above, can the practice of the
Pulsfords and their contemporaries be described as a trade or craft, or should it be
seen as a clear example of a profession, albeit in the early stages of development?

The trade versus profession debate is a recurrent and popular preoccupation of
social historians.82 Few would dissent from the view that there was not, by any

79Somerset County Record Office (Ref. DD/TD. 29/43; DD/FS Box 42, c 648; DD/SAS SE 23, c 795).
"Rev. John Collinson, The history of Somersetshire, vol. 3, London, 1791. Phelps, op. cit., note 12
above. Robin Atthill (editor), Mendip, a new study, Newton Abbott and London, David & Charles, 1976.
Victoria County History, op. cit., note 42 above.

"1Samuel Foart Simmons, Medical Register, 1780.

82A. M. Carr-Saunders and P. A. Wilson, The professions, London, Frank Cass, 1964 (originally

29

Irvine Loudon

important criteria, a unified medical profession before the nineteenth century.
Likewise, most would agree that physicians, collectively, displayed some at least of
the accepted features of a profession. The difficulty arises in attempting to assign an
agreed status-an acceptable labe-to the country surgeons and apothecaries,
without falling back on a process of backwards extrapolation from their nineteenth-
century successors. Freidson, for example, singled out autonomy as the key feature
of the professions in the sense of the right of an occupation to control its own work.
Moreover, that autonomy is seen as a privilege conferred by society. In theory,
physicians in the eighteenth century possessed such privileges and powers, at least at
the level of their London College, and attempted, however weakly, to enforce their
monopoly through the legal powers they possessed. But the lower ranks of medical
men were subject to no formal education, no examination, and no licensing. They
were not, in the sense intended by Freidson, an autonomous group, granted (by
society) the power and right to control their own affairs. The Society of
Apothecaries, the Company of Barber-Surgeons, and even more its successor after
1745 the Company of Surgeons, might have been expected to be the bodies through
which autonomy could be exerted. But, to the provincial practitioners, they were
distant corporations in London to which they owed no loyalty and which had no
interest in the welfare, education, or standards of practice of the provincial
practitioner.

Apart from autonomy, the criteria by which an occupation may be granted the
status of a profession include public recognition, a sense of service, an ethical code
enforced by the threat of expulsion from the profession, the setting and maintaining
of standards of education and practice, a sense of corporate identity and with this
what is called "professional pride". To some, professionalization is no more than a
conspiracy to establish a monopoly, cloaked in the disguise of altruistic concern for
the welfare of patients or clients. But to many historians involved in the trade v.
profession debates, the most attractive argument in the long run seems to be that a
profession is neither more nor less than a full-time occupation of high status. The
attractiveness of this argument is its simplicity. But in reality, it only shifts the
problem of definition from the word "profession" to the words "of high status". In
the end, this may be merely a circular argument: that an occupation has a high status
because it is, or looks like, one of the professions. Whichever of these criteria for the
definition of a profession is chosen, none seems to apply decisively to the provincial
surgeon-apothecary as described in this paper. Perhaps in the end we should appeal
to the contemporary description of the occupation. How did the surgeon-
apothecaries of the eighteenth century describe themselves? For it may be argued
that the use of the term "profession" by the surgeon-apothecary is prima facie
evidence of professional status. However, it is found that they referred to their

published 1933). W. J. Reader, Professional men, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1966. E. Freidson,
Profession of medicine, New York, Harper & Row, 1970. J. L. Berlant, Profession and monopoly. A study
of medicine in the United States and Great Britain, Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London, University of
California Press, 1975. Ivan Waddington, 'Competition and monopoly in Britain, the campaign for
medical registration in Britain', Amsterdams Sociologisch Tijdschrift, No. 2, October 1979: 288-321.

For a recent and cogent review of the debate, see Margaret Pelling, 'Medical practice in the early
modem period: trade or profession?', Bull. Soc. soc. Hist. Med., 1983, 32: 27-30.

30

Provincial medical practice in eighteenth-century England

occupation much more often as a trade or a business. Richard Smith junior in his
extensive biographical memoirs used the terms "being in a good line of business" or
"setting up in business" repeatedly.83 Campbell and the author of A general
description of all trades in 1747 both distinguish clearly between the professions of
Divinity, the Law, and Physic and the business or trade of the surgeon and the
apothecary.8' Yet a young practitioner who "set up in business" was likely to say he
did so in order to "practise his profession". There is no inconsistency here. In the
transitional state of medicine during the latter half of the eighteenth century the
distinction was uncertain and unimportant. Only in legal documents was there a
necessity to be decisive. The attorney who drew up a partnership agreement between
two Northampton practitioners in 1780, neatly hedged his bets when he wrote that
the partners agreed "to join together in the said several professions trades or
businesses of Surgery Midwifery and pharmacy".85 Faced with such evidence, the
debate set in the adversarial terms of either a trade or a profession may be
inappropriate, for it presupposes a sharp divide where none existed. The alternative
is to remain on the fence and say that the lower ranks of the profession came
somewhere between the tradesman and the professional gentleman. The navy placed
their surgeons in just such a position-neither on the upper nor the lower deck, but
midway with the Master and the Purser as warrant officers of wardroom rank, while
the junior surgeons lived in the gun-room. It was not until the nineteenth century,
after the reforms of 1805, that their status was raised by the granting of the privilege
of a uniform, and the naval surgeon was required to wear a "Captain's undress
uniform with a standup collar". The physician was distinguished by gold lace on his
sleeves, to emphasize that the gap still existed now that the surgeon could lay claim to
the status of an officer and a gentleman.86

VIII

This account of provincial practice in the eighteenth century began with two
contrary views. The first, a sort of mild Hogarthian caricature, pictured a generally
primitive level of medical practice deserving no more than the description of a trade.
The second was the more recent thesis of Holmes, who sees a marked advance of the
rank-and-file practitioners towards the status of professional men as something that
occurred between 1680 and 1730. The first view clearly underestimates the level of
clinical skills and of prosperity in the eighteenth century. As for the second, the
evidence suggests that the changes that Holmes described as occurring before 1730
took place at a later period. The increased prosperity and standing of medical
practitioners, and more especially the improvements in medical education, were
essentially features of the second half of the eighteenth century, even if there are
hints of such changes here and there before 1740. Medical education based on the
London hospitals and private courses of lectures had scarcely begun before 1750 and

83Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs, op. cit., note 20 above.
"See notes 32 and 47 above.

"Northampton County Record Office, Partnership agreement-undated (Ref. YZ 6070).

"Christopher Lloyd and Jack L. S. Coulter, Medicine and the Navy, vol. 3: 1714-1815, London, E & S
Livingstone, 1961.

31

Irvine Loudon

only became a thriving industry in the last quarter of the century, continuing into the
nineteenth. It then became an over-productive industry leading to bitter competition
between the general practitioners of the 1830s, '40s, and '50s. If those men looked
back in envy at their predecessors, who can blame them? By comparison, the second
half of the eighteenth century must have appeared as a golden period for medical
practitioners.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper is part of a study of the origin of the general practitioner and medical reform 1750-1850. The
author is a Wellcome Research Fellow and acknowledges with gratitude the support of the Trust. He
would like to thank Margaret Pelling and Jonathan Barry for valuable advice, and the staff of the Somerset
County Record Office in Taunton for their help with manuscripts.

32
